"On the Town: Cottonwood Falls," William Least Heat-Moon
---
[Our family's visit to Cottonwood Falls](https://kstoddles.blogspot.com/2019/11/cottonwood-falls.html)

Heat-Moon uses a few well-chosen details to structure his description of Cottonwood Falls:
* The Clock: Frequently struck by lightning; has only showed two times in all his visits.
* The native limestone  of which so many important structures are built
* The falls themselves: Tamed down from rapids; buried under a milldam.
* The Cottonwood Falls Hotel (2-story brick building, sold for $40)
* The Emma Chase Cafe Mexican Nite Special
* The Tallgrass Prairie Park
* The fact that towns are named after trees, no grasses or other native plants

He touches on a few important themes:
* The death of rural Kansas through depopulation or compromise
* The town's place within the American West (independence, toughness, practicality, survival)
* Displacement of native peoples

Look at the passage on p. 54, about the town as a "dusty jewel" vs. "a chiseled block of native stone."

"A Piece of Chalk," G. K. Chesterton.
---
Chesterton positions himself as odd, even eccentric, from the beginning of the essay. He relates how he values paper for its brownness, and how he has no desire for his drawings to last, and how he once thought about writing a book of epic poetry about all the stuff in his pockets.

The land as a muse: Chesterton does not draw nature; he wants to draw "devils and seraphim and blind old gods..." and actually does draw the soul of a cow for the very sensible reason that he has a hard time drawing the rear legs of quadrupeds.

BUT just because Chesterton doesn't get the best out of the landscape doesn't mean the landscape isn't getting the best out of him!

The pre-Romantic poets used the raw materials of the earth around them to produce their epic poetry. It's not ABOUT the natural world, but it is permeated with the images, colors, and feelings that the natural world inspired. They could not have written what they wrote without the natural world.

Chesterton makes the clever shift from chalk to morality through his claim that white is a positive, brilliant, necessary color. He then says, almost as an aside, that "the chief assertion of religious morality is that white is a colour." In other words, virtue is not merely the absence of vice, but is rather a positive thing to be pursued, cultivated, and enjoyed. (This certainly accords with Paul's series of commands in Ephesians 4-5, where he urges his listeners to not merely leave behind their darkness, but to also actively pursue and grow in the light.)

In his realization that southern England is a piece of chalk, he ties together his earlier musings about the world, the artist, and virtue. Just as it affords him literal white chalk to finish his literal drawings on brown paper, so it afforded the poets of old material to help create the very English civilization that Chesterton is a part of. This is perhaps why he says, "this Southern England is not only a grand peninsula, and a tradition and a civilisation; it is something even more admirable. It is a piece of chalk."

*Farmer Hiram on the World's War*, Lindley Grant Long
---
This is actually an epic poem, not traditional creative non-fiction. And yet, it is also an almost essayistic look at real-world events, which is why I included it in this class.

A few things to note about these poems:

* They're written in a colloquial, country-farmer voice by a man writing in rural Iowa shortly after World War I. 
* He personifies the great powers through their heads of state: George (King George V of England), William (Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany), Nick (Czar Nicholas II of Russia), Franz Ferdinand (Austria-Hungary), Albert (Albert I of Belgium).
* He displays insightful reflections. For example, "Where every one's wrong, and where every one's right, It's hard to diskiver the gist uv the fight." It is famously hard to disentangle all the causes of WWI, and many volumes have been written trying to assign blame or justify particular actions taken by leaders during that time.
* He has an excellent and thorough knowledge of the strategies and battles. For instance: "William... rushed, singin' -- sum millions er more -- To wake up Paree, bustin' in the back door." 
<br><br>Germany's plan for the war was to break through the north side of the French front and quickly capture Paris while France focused on the province of Alsace-Lorraine in the south. (This was called the von Schlieffen Plan after the general who formulated it.) If the Germans had followed this plan more exactly, it's likely that the war would have ended differently. But they pulled too many troops away from the right side, thus weakening the force that should have dealt the quick death blow. This allowed the French more time to defend, dig in, and begin the deadly trench warfare that characterized the war. <br><br>
* He shows a good understanding of various aspects of the war. For example, "The poilu was wedded till death to his trench -- To do less than die, wud be less than good French." This is a silly phrase, but gets at the heart of French ideals of bravery and national pride, which are part of what made the war so bloody. 
* By his use of colloquial speech and personification, he makes the war somehow more accessible than it is through news reports. This includes name-dropping generals, towns, and weapons as though he were talking about a neighbor and not about geopolitical movements half a world away. This also kind of democractizes the story of the war -- makes it accessible to everyone, even a farmer from Iowa.
