## Demo 1: [Library website](https://tscpl.bibliocommons.com/user/login)
* What is <a href="file:///C:/Users/micah.hawkinson.FUSIONMGT/OneDrive%20-%20Fusion/Documents/Personal/Equip%20Demos/login.html">this webpage</a>?
  * Be careful... online, things aren't always as they seem!
* Where is this webpage?
  * Look at the address bar
* How did it get there?
  * `Ctrl-S` will save any webpage and all the necessary assets to your computer
  * This is because all webpage data has to be locally available in order for your browser to display it
* Let's take a look at this password field... you can use `Ctrl-Shift-I`, but an easier way is `right-click -> Inspect`
  * Wanna see the password? Just take out this attribute!
  
## Demo 2: Defacing the [Wordle](https://www.nytimes.com/games/wordle/index.html) Keyboard
* We could probably figure out the day's Wordle if we dug around enough... but let's do some easier tricks!
* We can change the top row to say "HI MOM!!!!"
* We can change the Enter key to say "Don't click me!"

## Demo 3: Let's Make Some Money!
* Here's a <a href="file:///C:/Users/micah.hawkinson.FUSIONMGT/OneDrive%20-%20Fusion/Documents/Personal/Equip%20Demos/Accounts%20-%20chase.com.html">(fake) bank account</a>
* Here's a common scam:
  * They call and say they're with Microsoft or McAfee Antivirus and they owe you a $200 refund
  * They ask you to log into your bank account and share access to your PC via TeamViewer so they can "initiate the transfer"
  * Once you're logged in, they turn the screen black "for privacy reasons"
  * Then, they very quickly do this:
    * Increase balance by $2,000
    * Increase deposits by $2,000
  * They make the screen visible again
  * "Oh no! We've initiated an overpayment! We need to get an immediate refund from you or I will lose my job and the FBI will be contacting you regarding grand theft."
  * "Do you have a Walgreens nearby? The only way we can accept a refund is via Google Play gift cards..."