# Things to Discuss, 10/2/2024:

## Notes and reminders
* Optional Zoom Study Hall: Every Monday 10-10:30 a.m. Note that we will meet on 10/7 but **not on 10/14**.
* At this point, we should be done with the Ferris Wheel and working on the Pyramid Generator -- see the [Assignments](assignments.md) for details.
* If you're not caught up with class assignments, could you please email me to let me know your plan for catching up?
* We have no class and no assignment due on Wednesday, 10/9 - this could be a good chance to catch up or get ahead.

## Instructions for downloading `Zed's Colors`
* Click [this link](/zed_offline.zip) to download a zip file containing all the necessary elements to run the game offline.
* When prompted, save the file to your computer in a location you'll remember.
* Open the .zip file and extract it to the location of your choice. In Windows, you can do this with the `Extract All` button at the top of Windows Explorer.
* Open the code in your choice of editor. (I like VS Code.) 

## Changes to Zed's Colors
1. <s>Move `style` element to `.css` file</s>
1. <s>Bug: When you click the wrong color, then the right color before the sound stops playing, multiple sounds play at the same time</s>
1. <s>Sound files: all the color sounds start with 4 seconds of silence</s>
1. <s>Allows multiple button presses - bad UX</s>
1. No way to guess if I didn't have sound on or misheard
1. No way to play the sound again without failing
1. Too slow-paced
1. repetitive
1. terrible voice acting
1. unrealistic / uninteresting
1. visually boring
1. no way to win or lose
1. no way to know progress
1. different shapes / objectives (princesses, cookies, monsters)
1. a timer
1. a scoreboard
1. different layouts
1. different display (animation, 3D, different perspective)