"Unpacking My Library," Walter Benjamin
---

An arranged library is "touched by the mild boredom of order" (59).

"Every passion borders on the chaotic, but the collector's passion borders on the chaos of memories" (60).

"The most profound enchantment for the collector is the locking of individual items within a **magic** [emphasis mine] circle in which they are fixed as the final thrill, the thrill of acquisition, passes over them" (60). It strikes me that this must leave the collector feeling pretty empty when his collection is finally complete: No more thrills await him.

"The period, the region, the craftsmanship, the former ownership -- for a true collector the whole background of an item adds up to a **magic** [emphasis mine] encyclopedia whose quintessence is the fate of his object" (60). Again with the magic. Benjamin implies that there is some mystical force that draws the collector unto the things he wishes to collect. And I think that mystical force is the "chaos of memories" he mentions on p. 60.

Physiognomists (60): People who study a person's character by means of physical features. (Phrenologists were physiognomists who specialized in studying the skull.) This is a clever metaphor that gets at the heart of Benjamin's observations about collecting. A collector is captured by the uniqueness of the artifact rather than the ideas of the author. The author's ideas, insofar as they are part of the book, are important, but not the **most** important thing.

"Habent sua fata libelli" (61), "books have their fate": A partial quote from the Roman author Terentianus Maurus, part of "Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli." ("By the capability of the reader, books have their fate.") Benjamin takes a fragment of this quote and wrenches it utterly out of context, focusing on neither author (as implied in the original quote), reader (as explicitly stated in the original quote), but rather the physical artifact itself. And he does so quite cordially, with no malice toward poor Maurus. :-)

He mentions earlier people, bibliomaniacs, who steal to acquire books or become sick upon losing them (60). "Of all the ways of acquiring books, writing them oneself is regarded as the most praiseworthy method ... writers are really people who write books not because they are poor, but because they are dissatisfied with the books which they could buy but do not like" (61). XD

"Of the customary modes of acquisition, the one most appropriate to a collector would be the borrowing of a book with its attendant non-returning. The book borrower of real stature whom we envisage here proves himself to be an inveterate collector of books not so much by the fervor with which he guards his borrowed treasures and by the deaf ear which he turns to all reminders from the everyday world of legality as by his **failure to read these books** [emphasis mine] (62).

"To a book collector, you see, the true freedom of all books is somewhere on his shelves" (64).

"The phenomenon of collecting loses its meaning as it loses its personal owner" (67). The ideas and information are not the thing; the ownership is. That is why, to Benjamin, these beautifully bound first editions are in the same class as an album with stick-in pictures that his mother pasted in as a child (66).

"For a collector... ownership is the most intimate relationship that one can have to objects. Not that they come alive in him; it is he who lives in them" (67).

* What are some joys of the collector's life?
* What are some sorrows or potential threats?
* What does Scripture teach about physical possessions and the Christian's relationship to them?


Buechner's "The Road Goes On"
---
<blockquote>We are none of us strangers. Not even I. Not even you. Because how can we be strangers when, for all these years, we have ridden on the back of this same rogue planet, when we have awakened to the same sun and dreamed the same dreams under the same moon? How can we be strangers when we are all of us in the same interior war and do battle with the same interior enemy, which is most of the time ourselves? How can we be strangers when we laugh and cry at the same things and have the same bad habits and occasionally astonish ourselves and everybody else by performing the same uncharacteristic deeds of disinterested kindness and love?
</blockquote>

Buechner introduces his topic with the idea of shared human experience. He appeals to his audience's hopes, struggles, joys, and sorrows and declares himself to be a sharer of them.

<blockquote>
Christ is our employer as surely as the general contractor is the carpenter’s employer, only the chances are that this side of Paradise we will never see his face except mirrored darkly in dreams and shadows, if we’re lucky, and in each other’s faces. He is our general, but the chances are that this side of Paradise we will never hear his voice except in the depth of our own inner silence and in each other’s voices. He is our shepherd, but the chances are we will never feel his touch except as we are touched by the joy and pain and holiness of our own life and each other’s lives. He is our pilot, our guide, our true, fast, final friend and judge, but often when we need him most, he seems farthest away because he will always have gone on ahead, leaving only the faint print of his feet on the path to follow. And the world blows leaves across the path.
</blockquote>

Buechner tells his audience they have a vocation, a calling by Christ. He is our guide, but He's so hard to follow sometimes. And so we identify with the Bible characters who similarly struggled to see Him and hear His voice: Mary Magdelene, the men on the road to Emmaus, and many others. 

The quote from T. S. Eliot: 
<blockquote>... wait without hope
<br>For hope would be hope of the wrong thing; wait without love
<br>For love would be love of the wrong thing; there is yet faith
<br>But the faith and the love and the hope are all in the waiting.
<br>Wait without thought, for you are not ready for thought:
​<br>So the darkness shall be light, and the stillness the dancing.</blockquote>

Why does Buechner use this quote? How does it further his ideas? How does it relate to the other things he's doing?

And now the allusion from the speech's title:

<blockquote>
If I were braver than I am, I would sing you a song at this point. If you were braver than you are, you might even encourage me to. But let me at least say you a song. It is from <em>The Lord of the Rings</em>, and Bilbo Baggins sings it. It goes like this.
<p>
<blockquote>The road goes ever on and on
<br>Down from the door where it began.
<br>Now far ahead the road has gone,
<br>And I must follow if I can,
<br>Pursuing it with weary feet,
<br>Until it joins some larger way,
<br>Where many paths and errands meet.
<br>And whither then?
<br>I cannot say.
</blockquote>
<p>
“I am the way,” Jesus said. I am the road. And in some foolish fashion, we are all on the road that is his, that is he, or such at least is our hope and prayer. That is why we are here at this turning of the road.
</blockquote>

Buechner speaks at length of how the daily grind of the world can be demanding, and yet we have been called to be in Christ through the journey. Then, he revisits *LotR*:

<blockquote>
“And whither then?” the song asks. The world of The Lord of the Rings is an enchanted world. It is a shadowy world where life and death are at stake and where things are seldom what they seem. It is a dangerous and beautiful world in which great evil and great good are engaged in a battle where more often than not the odds are heavily in favor of great evil. It is a world where enormous burdens are loaded on small shoulders and where the most fateful issues hang on what are apparently the most homely and insignificant decisions. And thus it is through a world in many ways much like our own that the road winds.</blockquote>

The way Buechner pulls everything together in his conclusion is nothing short of masterful:

<blockquote>
Strange things happen. Again and again Christ is present not where, as priests, you would be apt to look for him but precisely where you wouldn’t have thought to look for him in a thousand years. The great preacher, the sunset, the Mozart Requiem can leave you cold, but the child in the doorway, the rain on the roof, the half-remembered dream, can speak of him and for him with an eloquence that turns your knees to water. The decisions you think are most important turn out not to matter so much after all, but whether or not you mail the letter, the way you say goodbye or decide not to say it, the afternoon you cancel everything and drive out to the beach to watch the tide come in -- these are apt to be the moments when souls are won or lost, including quite possibly your own.

You come to places where many paths and errands meet, as the song says, as all our paths meet for a moment here, we friends who are strangers, we strangers who are friends. Great possibilities for good or for ill may come of the meeting, and often it is the leaden casket rather than the golden casket that contains the treasure, and the one who seems to have least to offer turns out to be the one who has most.

“And whither then?” Whither now? “I cannot say,” the singer says, nor yet can I. But far ahead the road goes on anyway, and we must follow if we can because it is our road, it is his road, it is the only road that matters when you come right down to it. Let me finally say only this one thing more.

I was sitting by the side of the road one day last fall. It was a dark time in my life. I was full of anxiety, full of fear and uncertainty. The world within seemed as shadowy as the world without. And then, as I sat there, I spotted a car coming down the road toward me with one of those license plates that you can get by paying a little extra with a word on it instead of just numbers and a letter or two. And of all the words the license plate might have had on it, the word that it did have was the word T-R-U-S-T: TRUST. And as it came close enough for me to read, it became suddenly for me a word from on high, and I give it to you here as a word from on high also for you, a kind of graduation present.

The world is full of dark shadows to be sure, both the world without and the world within, and the road we’ve all set off on is long and hard and often hard to find, but the word is trust. Trust the deepest intuitions of your own heart. Trust the source of your own truest gladness. Trust the road. Above all else, trust him. Trust him. Amen.
</blockquote>

All the elements come together, almost as if by magic: The threads of stranger / friend, calling, hope / waiting, the metaphor of life as a road that goes ever on and on, and Jesus as the Way, the Road Himself.

* How does Buechner's view of the world differ from Benjamin's?
* What is important to each? 
* What does one believe or value that the other wouldn't?

Stephen Metcalf's "Man of War"
---
Metcalf's essay is somewhat complicated -- it hinges on his relationship to the work of Paul Fussell, and Fussell's own work and life in relation to World War II, which came about in direct response to the great modernist shift of World War I. Metcalf writes:

<blockquote><em>The Great War</em> tells the story of the destruction of the 19th century —of its class system and its faith in progress; really, of any way of living predicated on a stable system of value —by World War I. Out of the mass experience of pointless death, a new way of speaking and writing, devoid of euphemism, arose, a plain style we associate with Hemingway (“Abstract words such as glory, honor, courage, or hallow were obscene beside the concrete names of villages, the number of roads, the names of rivers, the number of regiments and dates”)...

<em>The Great War</em> chronicles the loss of the old rhetoric, of high pieties, of sacrifice and roseate dawns, in favor of “blood, terror, agony, madness, shit, cruelty, murder, sell-out, pain and hoax,” as Fussell lists it at one point; the sound of “ominous gunfire heard across water.” Fussell himself fought in World War II, and himself wrote in a candid style. “I am saying,” he concludes one chapter in <em>The Great War</em>, as if replying to a margin note from a junior editor, “that there seems to be one dominating form of modern understanding; that it is essentially ironic; and that it originates largely in the application of mind and memory to the events of the Great War.”</blockquote>

This was a new emphasis on observable, material reality, because the Great War had knocked old abstract ways of thinking clear off the table.

People no longer believed in high ideals of patriotism, progress, and the enlightenment of the world by Western Civilization, because the Great War shattered these ideas. Men from all of these Western nations were dying in muddy, rat-infested trenches like animals -- dying of disease modern marvels like poisonous gas and machine guns and bombs dropped from aeroplanes.

Metcalf closes the essay by calling back to his earlier humorous description of his weekly commute from NY state to Philadelphia:

<blockquote>In my imagination (I never met him), Fussell had always been what an English professor should be: erudite, frank, worldly, unworldly, acerbic: library and cosmopolis unto himself. When, out of the blue, I was asked to adjunct a nonfiction writing class at Penn, I said yes, even though, as the crow flies, the gig made absolutely no sense. Every week I headed down to Philly on Amtrak, and every week I faced down the same revelation: that instead of the runnels of blood-strewn ditches, my prose is filled with pita chips, iced coffee, Facebook, and procrastination. Nonetheless, we front our losses as they come. I taught my class as honestly as I knew how; I loved my students; and every week, autumn falling over West Philly, I threw the black bag back over my shoulder, still blessedly heavier than itself, and the sum of its contents.</blockquote>

* In a sense, Metcalf draws his lineage from Fussell, and from the generation before him ("The Lost Generation," peopled by men like Hemingway)
* In Metcalf's description of his life and work, do you hear any echoes of Fussell's experiences? Of Hemingway's or those of his generation?
* What legacies of the Great War remain for us as modern Americans? 
* How do Christ and His teachings fit into this discussion? 
* How does the failure of (the Judeo-Christian) Western Civilization during WWI affect your faith, if at all?