# Things to Discuss, 9/18/2024:

## Help With Class
* Optional Study Hall: I emailed you about it. Every Monday 10-10:30 a.m.
* GroupMe: I emailed you about it. Use the link to join the group and chat about homework with your classmates.
* Is there something else that would help?

## Cafe Menu
* Questions about the project? Problems?
* If you can't turn it in, please email me to let me know your plan for when you will turn it in. Clear expectations are an important part of software development!

## Instructions for downloading `Zed's Colors`
* Click [this link](/zed_offline.zip) to download a zip file containing all the necessary elements to run the game offline.
* When prompted, save the file to your computer in a location you'll remember.
* Open the .zip file and extract it to the location of your choice. In Windows, you can do this with the `Extract All` button at the top of Windows Explorer.
* Open the code in your choice of editor. (I like VS Code.) 

## Changes to Zed's Colors
1. <s>Move `style` element to `.css` file</s>
1. Bug: When you click the wrong color, then the right color before the sound stops playing, multiple sounds play at the same time
1. Sound files: all the color sounds start with 4 seconds of silence
1. Allows multiple button presses - bad UX
1. No way to guess if I didn't have sound on or misheard
1. No way to play the sound again without failing
1. Too slow-paced
1. repetitive
1. terrible voice acting, but some small improvement in the latest commit. :-)
1. unrealistic / uninteresting
