[Back to Assignments Page](assignments.md)
---

Jeffrey Overstreet's "Frame 1: Intersection"
---
Overstreet has a keen awareness of place, especially of the weather and his home and the neighborhood.

He opens by personifying the sun at sunset: 

>The sun has bent down to peer beneath the heavy blanket of a cloud-shadowed day. We cannot see her face — the drama breaks behind a stand of evergreens just west of the house — but we know by the luminous evidence, by how the clouds are warmed to gold by her surprise.

We get a clue of the underlying sadnessin the third paragraph:
>Everything feels like an echo, distant, in this new hollow of a recent harrowing: a father whose sudden departure we have only begun to grieve.

Here is the crescendo of the scene, where their emotion meets with film and music and poetry and the spectre of the Pacific:

>On the big screen, the film *24 Frames* is playing, a sequence of still photographs teased into subtle life by imaginative digital artists: views of landscapes, weather, and animals as captured, imagined, enhanced, and dreamed by Abbas Kiarostami, who recently passed. Each view, for almost five minutes, is blessedly free of talk, opening and closing uncertainly, like a prayer. We have traded our windows for someone else’s.
>
>A breeze from the Pacific has come up the hill to cool us, while wind from our TV’s sound bar testifies of past storms in Iran, while we dream of sipping smoked sage margaritas and savoring the Santa Fe monsoons to come.
>
>I pick up the new collection of Scott Cairns poetry and read of a memory of a boy who, standing at the Pacific Ocean’s edge, looks into the distance with a sense of something yet to be revealed.
>
>“Ave Maria,” sung in a soprano’s reverie, fills up the open space like wine.

Francis Bacon's "Of Travel"
---

Travel as education: It needs a wise instructor.

>He that travelleth into a country, before he hath some entrance
into the language, goeth to school, and not to travel. That young men
travel under some tutor, or grave servant, I allow well; so that he be such a
one that hath the language, and hath been in the country before; whereby
he may be able to tell them what things are worthy to be seen, in the country where they go; what acquaintances they are to seek; what exercises, or
discipline, the place yieldeth. For else, young men shall go hooded, and
look abroad little. 

Diaries: Why on earth would people keep them on the sea where everything is basically the same and not when they actually get to the country they're going to?!

>It is a strange thing, that in sea voyages, where there is
nothing to be seen, but sky and sea, men should make diaries; but in landtravel, wherein so much is to be observed, for the most part they omit it; as
if chance were fitter to be registered, than observation. Let diaries, therefore, be brought in use.

It's interesting what kinds of things Bacon *doesn't* urges his reader to pay attention to. He doesn't mention the animals or plants, or the unique concerns of the people in the land. Instead, he focuses on "progress" - courts, buildings, commerce, the military. He also urges his reader to seek out only the people of "finest quality" in these foreign lands.

What effect should travel have, in the end?

>  And let
his travel appear rather in his discourse, than his apparel or gesture; and
in his discourse, let him be rather advised in his answers, than forward to
tell stories; and let it appear that he doth not change his country manners,
for those of foreign parts; but only prick in some flowers, of that he hath
learned abroad, into the customs of his own country.

In other words, use your foreign travel to enrich your life. Don't let it become something that dominates your thoughts, manners, and conversations.

Annie Dillard's "Write Till You Drop"
---
Dillard seeks to awaken her reader to the urgency of writing: 
> Write as if you were dying. At the same time, assume you write for an audience consisting solely of terminal patients. That is, after all, the case. What would you begin writing if you knew you would die soon? What could you say to a dying person that would not enrage by its triviality?

What does it take to become a writer?
> A well-known writer got collared by a university student who asked, ''Do you think I could be a writer?''
>
>''Well,'' the writer said, ''I don't know. . . . Do you like sentences?''
>
>The writer could see the student's amazement. Sentences? Do I like sentences? I am 20 years old and do I like sentences? If he had liked sentences, of course, he could begin, like a joyful painter I knew. I asked him how he came to be a painter. He said, ''I liked the smell of the paint.''

Writers love other writing like theirs, and also the work: 

>if you ask a 21-year-old poet whose poetry he likes, he might say, unblushing, ''Nobody's.'' He has not yet understood that poets like poetry, and novelists like novels; he himself likes only the role, the thought of himself in a hat. 

Immediately after:
>Rembrandt and Shakespeare, Bohr and Gauguin, possessed powerful hearts, not powerful wills. They loved the range of materials they used. The work's possibilities excited them; the field's complexities fired their imaginations. The caring suggested the tasks; the tasks suggested the schedules. They learned their fields and then loved them. They worked, respectfully, out of their love and knowledge, and they produced complex bodies of work that endure. Then, and only then, the world harassed them with some sort of wretched hat, which, if they were still living, they knocked away as well as they could, to keep at their tasks.

Writing is a struggle, yes, but also a mystical conduit of grace:

>The sensation of writing a book is the sensation of spinning, blinded by love and daring. It is the sensation of a stunt pilot's turning barrel rolls, or an inchworm's blind rearing from a stem in search of a route. At its worst, it feels like alligator wrestling, at the level of the sentence.
>
>At its best, the sensation of writing is that of any unmerited grace. It is handed to you, but only if you look for it. You search, you break your fists, your back, your brain, and then - and only then -it is handed to you. From the corner of your eye you see motion. Something is moving through the air and headed your way. It is a parcel bound in ribbons and bows; it has two white wings. It flies directly at you; you can read your name on it. If it were a baseball, you would hit it out of the park. It is that one pitch in a thousand you see in slow motion; its wings beat slowly as a hawk's.

And some parting advice, probably the most inspirational advice I have ever heard about writing:

>One of the few things I know about writing is this: spend it all, shoot it, play it, lose it, all, right away, every time. Do not hoard what seems good for a later place in the book, or for another book; give it, give it all, give it now. The impulse to save something good for a better place later is the signal to spend it now. Something more will arise for later, something better. These things fill from behind, from beneath, like well water. Similarly, the impulse to keep to yourself what you have learned is not only shameful, it is destructive. Anything you do not give freely and abundantly becomes lost to you. You open your safe and find ashes.
>
>After Michelangelo died, someone found in his studio a piece of paper on which he had written a note to his apprentice, in the handwriting of his old age: ''Draw, Antonio, draw, Antonio, draw and do not waste time.''

George Orwell's "Politics and the English Language"
---
His main point is that the decadence of the English language is reversible, if we all pay attention to what we're doing:
>Modern English, especially written English, is full of bad habits which spread by imitation and which can be avoided if one is willing to take the necessary trouble. If one gets rid of these habits one can think more clearly, and to think clearly is a necessary first step toward political regeneration: so that the fight against bad English is not frivolous and is not the exclusive concern of professional writers.

The problems he mentions are:
* DYING METAPHORS 
  - What does this phrase even mean? 
  - Is it a cliche?
  - Can I use a fresher image?
* OPERATORS OR VERBAL FALSE LIMBS
  - Needlessly complicated verb phrases 
  - Often Latinate (big, complicated words) instead of Germanic (shorter, more commonplace words)
  - Maybe just wordy: "Due to the fact that," e.g.
* PRETENTIOUS DICTION
  - Say what you mean, in a way people can understand
  - "It is often easier to make up words of this kind (deregionalize, impermissible, extramarital, non-fragmentary and so forth) than to think up the English words that will cover one's meaning."
  - That really gets at the crux of this whole thing: People use shortcuts, and unquestioned shortcuts do not make for good prose. 
* MEANINGLESS WORDS
  - A word ought to be strong, meaningful, and vivid.
  - If it's not well-defined, think twice about using it.
  - Is there another word whose meaning is more commonly accepted that you could use instead?
  - To paraphrase Dillard, a writer is someone who not only likes sentences, but likes words, too.

This is a very compelling part of Orwell's argument:
>Now that I have made this catalogue of swindles and perversions, let me give another example of the kind of writing that they lead to. This time it must of its nature be an imaginary one. I am going to translate a passage of good English into modern English of the worst sort. Here is a well-known verse from Ecclesiastes:
>
>>I returned and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.
>
>Here it is in modern English:
>
>>Objective considerations of contemporary phenomena compel the conclusion that success or failure in competitive activities exhibits no tendency to be commensurate with innate capacity, but that a considerable element of the unpredictable must invariably be taken into account.

Here's another really good example of what he means:
>Consider for instance some comfortable English professor defending Russian totalitarianism. He cannot say outright, ‘I believe in killing off your opponents when you can get good results by doing so’. Probably, therefore, he will say something like this:
>
>>‘While freely conceding that the Soviet regime exhibits certain features which the humanitarian may be inclined to deplore, we must, I think, agree that a certain curtailment of the right to political opposition is an unavoidable concomitant of transitional periods, and that the rigors which the Russian people have been called upon to undergo have been amply justified in the sphere of concrete achievement.’
>
>The inflated style itself is a kind of euphemism. A mass of Latin words falls upon the facts like soft snow, blurring the outline and covering up all the details. The great enemy of clear language is insincerity. When there is a gap between one's real and one's declared aims, one turns as it were instinctively to long words and exhausted idioms, like a cuttlefish spurting out ink.

Finally, his list of advice:
1. Never use a metaphor, simile, or other figure of speech which you are used to seeing in print.
2. Never use a long word where a short one will do.
3. If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.
4. Never use the passive where you can use the active.
5. Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word, or a jargon word if you can think of an everyday English equivalent.
6. Break any of these rules sooner than say anything outright barbarous.