# Things to Discuss, 9/25/2024:

## Help with class
* Optional Study Hall: I emailed you about it. Every Monday 10-10:30 a.m.
* GroupMe: I emailed you about it. Use the link to join the group and chat about homework with your classmates.
* Is there something else that would help?

## Weekly assignment
* Beware! The Ferris Wheel has some complicated elements. But it looks pretty neat.

## Instructions for downloading `Zed's Colors`
* Click [this link](/zed_offline.zip) to download a zip file containing all the necessary elements to run the game offline.
* When prompted, save the file to your computer in a location you'll remember.
* Open the .zip file and extract it to the location of your choice. In Windows, you can do this with the `Extract All` button at the top of Windows Explorer.
* Open the code in your choice of editor. (I like VS Code.) 


## Code changes - view diff on GitHub
* I've made more updates to Zed's Color Game. Look at [this commit](https://github.com/micahpaul/micahpaul.github.io/compare/72c5043017daf628063afe058289d9fa5acec9d8...872aff37ee999e62a2a29a192057dd3333d4f1ac) to see the latest bug fixes.

## Changes to Zed's Colors
1. <s>Move `style` element to `.css` file</s>
1. <s>Bug: When you click the wrong color, then the right color before the sound stops playing, multiple sounds play at the same time</s>
1. <s>Sound files: all the color sounds start with 4 seconds of silence</s>
1. <s>Allows multiple button presses - bad UX</s>
1. No way to guess if I didn't have sound on or misheard
1. No way to play the sound again without failing
1. Too slow-paced
1. repetitive
1. terrible voice acting
1. unrealistic / uninteresting
1. visually boring
1. no way to win or lose
1. no way to know progress
1. different shapes / objectives (princesses, cookies, monsters)
1. a timer
1. a scoreboard
1. different layouts
1. different display (animation, 3D, different perspective)